# Chapter 8

Maintaining privacy, security, and anonymity requires skills, patience, dedication, and a lot of time. This book is supposed to be a starting point for the privacy journey of those people who need it, rather than being a complete guide, as such a thing never existed and never will. Most of the time, you need to do your own research, program stuff the way you need them, configure systems to make them private for you, and there aren't always resources to learn from. You need to learn by trial and error and playing around with different things. The more you expand your knowledge in different areas, the more you can combine them and find new solutions for a problem, and it can be for anything, not just privacy or security.

Your journey will be different than someone else's. What works for you won't work for others; you might need different skills than someone else. What is effective today might not be tomorrow; what is good today might become evil tomorrow. One thing that remains consistent in the privacy journey is the need to adapt because the world never stops changing, and privacy and security are part of it as well. Someday, most of the things in this book might become obsolete, and that is fine if you adapt to the new situation and try to find new strategies and solutions.

Privacy and security aren't destinations you can reach; they're the road and the journey itself. You might not even want to be 100% secure or private, even if it was possible (which it is not and will not be). The best you can do is to find a middle ground between ignorance and chronic fear and paranoia. The more you learn and expand your knowledge, the easier it might be to get there, as you are more aware of threats and know more about ways to protect yourself against them. The key is to remain cautious, persistent, and keep on learning and adapting to the changes.

In this chapter, which is the final chapter, I will go through some of the skills that I find important, but they're not everything. There are a lot more skills, a lot more tools, a lot more techniques that you might find useful. I tried to keep things more general so that most people can use them, but every unique situation needs unique solutions.