# Chapter 2

Imagine you're playing Minecraft. You've respawned somewhere random on the map, and you don't have the geo-location of the house you had built. It would be really annoying and time-consuming, or sometimes even impossible (leading to frustration), to find your home in the game if you don't know where and in which direction to go. You run out of food, out of energy, and there will be nights with all the mobs—zombies trying to attack you, skeletons shooting arrows at you, and creepers blowing themselves up right beside you. But if you had the X, Y, Z coordinates of your house and the direction you needed to go, you could've gotten there before nightfall, before facing all those challenges.

In this book, I've planned to explain more advanced stuff as the chapters progress. So, the first chapter was about debunking some common myths about privacy and security. In this chapter, things get a little more actionable. This chapter will focus on threat modeling because I believe it's the most crucial step to take when you start your privacy journey. Otherwise, you'll spend a lot of time, stress, hard work, and sufferings without achieving your personal needs.

Having a threat model can be the equivalent of having the location of your house in Minecraft written down on a paper. Whenever you go far away from your home, you know where to go to get back. In the case of privacy and security, you'll be understanding what threats are relevant to you personally, what you want to protect, and taking actions based on that. Instead of blindly using Tor on Whonix OS for no actual reason and making your own life harder and even worsening your privacy in the process.